[Music]
this is the opinions a show that brings
you a mix of voices from New York Times
opinion you've heard the news here's
what to make of
[Music]
it I am Paul Krugman I'm an opinion
writer for the New York Times and an
economist on the
side with Trump going back to the White
House as a citizen I'm terrified very
much so this is a guy with authoritarian
impulses and it looks like very few
guard rails so God knows what America
will look like in a couple of
years as an economist there's a great
irony here which is that the biggest
single factor in Trump's victory was the
fact that there was a burst of inflation
it's in the rearview mirror now but
people are still annoyed at how much
things cost and yet Trump's economic
program as far as we can tell
is the most inflationary program
probably that any American president has
ever tried to implement so people voted
against what they're probably actually
going to
[Music]
get there are a few big reasons why
Trump's plan looks seriously
inflationary one is he is going to
explode the deficit he's got all of
these tax cut promises they are massive
tax cuts biggest ever completely
unfunded Fant IES about raising the
money through tariffs or massive
spending cuts which are not going to
happen and when you have an economy
that's already running pretty hot
deficits are
inflationary second thing tariffs to me
the most beautiful word in the
dictionary is tariff a tariff is a tax
on Imports it's a sales tax Much As
Trump insists that foreigners will pay
it that's not how it works third thing
is Crackdown on undocumented immigrants
we will begin and we have no choice the
largest deportation operation in America
we have which will probably end up
catching a lot of people who are legally
here anyway so that's an important part
of our Workforce and particularly
heavily in the agricultural sector
actually also the food processing center
so the food on your table is largely put
there by immigrants many of whom will
end up being deported what's going to
happen is the farm owners are going to
have to pay much much higher wages to
get people to do those jobs which the
farmers will have to pass on in the form
of higher prices and then secondarily
people are upset about housing costs and
rent and the answer to that is build
more houses who builds houses and the
answer is a large part of the
construction Force as far and Bor too so
those are the two places where you're
really going to see a Major Impact if
Trump actually goes through with his
plans to round up undocumented
immigrants
and finally there's what he wants to do
with the Federal Reserve I made a lot of
money I was very successful and I think
I have a better Instinct than in many
cases people that would be on the
Federal Reserve or the
chairman we have an independent quazi
independent agency that sets interest
rates that controls monetary policy
that's not in the Constitution it's not
even something that we always had in the
United States but that's the solution
that most advanced countries have come
around to as the best way of achieving
stability and most US presidents in the
modern era have been extremely cautious
about respecting the independence of the
fit we've decided to Outsource this
piece of policy to
technocrats Trump even during his first
term broke with that tradition he
lectured the FED saying I want you to
cut rates even said I want rates to go
negative uh it didn't have much effect
first time around but if we have the
situation that I believe we're going to
have where inflation has taken off
because of Trump's policies and the
Federal Reserve following its normal
procedure wants to start hiking interest
rates to put a lid on that inflation
very very likely that Trump will go
through the roof he'll say how dare you
I have found this guy who tells me you
should be cutting interest rates instead
of raising him and again the fense in
dependence is not set in stone so I
would consider it very likely that the
FED will not react as it normally would
to put a lid on the inflation that
tariffs and deportations are
causing if there's one thing that we've
learned from watching Trump it's that he
dismisses facts he doesn't like he tells
us that we have rampant crime when in
fact murder is plent ing he says that
all the jobs are going to immigrants
which is not true and so I have very
little reason to believe that Trump will
acknowledge that his policies are
actually producing inflation much more
likely that he'll start putting pressure
on government statistical agencies to
report better numbers that is what
autocratic regimes have done around the
world in the past so it's quite unlikely
that he will actually reverse course
either on the tariffs or on the
deportations
what should listeners take from this you
know first of all I would say you should
probably be aware that some things
especially I think food is about to get
substantially more expensive it's funny
because the big runup in prices that we
had under Biden was actually nobody's
fault it was consequences of the
pandemic disruption and to a limited
extent the war in Ukraine and it
happened everywhere there's almost an
eerie similarity in the track of
inflation across major economies this
time if we have the inflation that I
think is coming it will be somebody's
fault it will be Trump's policies that
do it there will be a lot of buyers
remorse a big backlash from the voting
public now how that actually translates
and you know what the next election
looks like is a whole other question but
I do think that people are in for a
really rude shock and they will be very
upset
if you like this show follow it on
Spotify apple or wherever you get your
podcasts this show is produced by Derek
Arthur Sophia Alvarez Boyd vishaka derba
pheet Christina samuli and Jillian
Weinberger it's edited by Ki Pitkin
Allison Bru and Annie Rose strer
engineering mixing and original music by
Isaac Jones Sonia Herrero Pat mccusker
Carol Sabo and aim Shapiro additional
music by ammen sahota the fact check
team is Kate Sinclair Mary Marge locker
and Michelle
Harris audience strategy by Shannon
Busta Christina samuli and Adrien
Rivera the executive producer of times
opinion audio is Annie Rose dresser